# S2RDNet
Multispectral Low-Rank Decomposition for Unsupervised Pan-sharpening with an Interpretable Degradation Process Inversion
# abstract
Unsupervised pan-sharpening aims to generate high-resolution multispectral (HRMS) images by fusing high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) and low-resolution multispectral (LRMS) images without requiring expensive labeled data, which is valuable in practice. However, most existing unsupervised methods fail to effectively utilize the low-rank properties of MS images, resulting in suboptimal results. For this, we integrate the low-rank properties of MS images into a realistic image degradation framework and propose an interpretable method, termed S2RD-Net. In S2RD-Net, a novel low-rank decomposition (LRD) named Spatial-Spectral-Rank-Decomposition (S2RD) is first proposed to decompose MS images into spatial and spectral low-rank components. Subsequently, we apply S2RD within the conventional pan-sharpening formulation and optimize the solution using the Half-Quadratic Splitting (HQS) algorithm. Following this manner, the Degradation-Unfolded Optimization Block (DUOB) of S2RD-Net is designed to solve the degradation operator with the generalized gradient descent algorithm, and the Low-Rank Spectral Refinement Block (LRSRB) leverages neural networks to optimize the low-rank components. By iteratively stacking DUOB and LRSRB, the proposed S2RD-Net progressively refines the reconstruction results and achieves superior performance in unsupervised pan-sharpening tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that S2RD-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks, validating its effectiveness, efficiency, and interpretability.
